chore(memory): promote strong-fit contacts drafts for review (#132)
medic/cht-agent: agent-memory/domains/contacts/issues/9426-prevent-contacts-under-wrong-parent.md

issueNumber: 9426
issueUrl: https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues/9426
title: Prevent creating contacts under non-direct parent type
lastUpdated: '2026-08-17'
summary: Fixed a validation gap where contacts could be created under any parent by manipulating the URL, bypassing the configured hierarchy. Added parent type validation in the ContactsEditComponent.
services:
  - webapp
techStack:
  - typescript
  - angular
source_prs:
  - "medic/cht-core#9563"
related_issues:

>   - cht-core-6363

Reviewer: **suggestion (non-blocking):** Decision from #122 first, so this PR does not wait on that thread:
`related_issues` holds **cht-core issue numbers**, not corpus entry ids. All seven backfilled values
in this delta are real cht-core issues, none is a PR, so all seven stay, including the three with no
promoted entry (10343, 8889, 6363). A link that dangles today resolves automatically if that issue's
memory is later promoted, since entry ids are themselves `cht-core-<issueNumber>`. No schema edit
here; #138 lands the matching description.

The rule we are applying: a link to a real issue stays, only an inaccurate *description* of it gets
flagged. The one inaccuracy is this draft's line 71: #6363 is "Prevent and/or merge duplicate
contacts", a duplicate-detection discussion, not a hierarchy-integrity one; hierarchy appears only in
its move-between-parents proposal. That line predates this PR, so GitHub will not accept a suggestion
block on it; a hand edit to this wording would close it:

> `- #6363: Duplicate-contact prevention/merging; touches hierarchy only through its move-between-parents proposal`

- Fails closed — an invalid parent prevents form rendering entirely rather than showing a warning
- Only applies to creation, not editing (editing a contact doesn't change its parent relationship)

> > **Note:** This fix is client-side only for the webapp form path. Neither `validate_doc_update.js` (medic nor medic-client) enforces parent-child hierarchy rules, so a direct CouchDB write with an invalid parent would still succeed. Server-side validation does exist, but only on the API path: `validatePlace` in `shared-libs/contacts/src/places.js` rejects a wrong parent type via `contactTypesUtils.isParentOf(parentType, type)` (`places.js:83`) for `POST /api/v1/places`, at this PR's anchor and still on master.

Reviewer: **suggestion (non-blocking):** Scoped to master, "only on the API path: `validatePlace`" is an
undercount. The cht-datasource write routes added by #10083 also enforce parent type server-side:
`POST /api/v1/place` reaches `getParentForCreate`, which calls `assertHasValidParentType`, and
`POST /api/v1/person` reaches `assertParent`. An agent reading this draft would conclude master has
exactly one server-side hierarchy check when it has two families of them.

```suggestion
> **Note:** This fix is client-side only for the webapp form path. Neither `validate_doc_update.js` (medic nor medic-client) enforces parent-child hierarchy rules, so a direct CouchDB write with an invalid parent would still succeed. Server-side validation does exist, but only on API write paths: at this PR's anchor the only one was `validatePlace` in `shared-libs/contacts/src/places.js`, rejecting a wrong parent type via `contactTypesUtils.isParentOf(parentType, type)` (`places.js:83`) for `POST /api/v1/places`; that check is still on master, and master additionally enforces parent type on the cht-datasource write routes added by #10083 (`POST /api/v1/place` → `getParentForCreate` → `assertHasValidParentType` in `local/place.ts`; `POST /api/v1/person` → `assertParent` in `local/person.ts`).
```

- Fails closed — an invalid parent prevents form rendering entirely rather than showing a warning
- Only applies to creation, not editing (editing a contact doesn't change its parent relationship)

> > **Note:** This fix is client-side only for the webapp form path. Neither `validate_doc_update.js` (medic nor medic-client) enforces parent-child hierarchy rules, so a direct CouchDB write with an invalid parent would still succeed. Server-side validation does exist, but only on API write paths: at this PR's anchor the only one was `validatePlace` in `shared-libs/contacts/src/places.js`, rejecting a wrong parent type via `contactTypesUtils.isParentOf(parentType, type)` (`places.js:83`) for `POST /api/v1/places`; that check is still on master, and master additionally enforces parent type on the cht-datasource write routes added by #10083 (`POST /api/v1/place` → `getParentForCreate` → `assertHasValidParentType` in `local/place.ts`; `POST /api/v1/person` → `assertParent` in `local/person.ts`).

Reviewer: **nitpick (non-blocking):** This is my round-4 wording, applied verbatim. It puts
`assertHasValidParentType` "in `local/place.ts`". The function is defined in
`local/libs/lineage.ts:296`. `local/place.ts:91` calls it. The `10057` drift note in this PR names
lineage.ts. The two drafts must agree. This error is mine.

```suggestion
> **Note:** This fix is client-side only for the webapp form path. Neither `validate_doc_update.js` (medic nor medic-client) enforces parent-child hierarchy rules, so a direct CouchDB write with an invalid parent would still succeed. Server-side validation does exist, but only on API write paths: at this PR's anchor the only one was `validatePlace` in `shared-libs/contacts/src/places.js`, rejecting a wrong parent type via `contactTypesUtils.isParentOf(parentType, type)` (`places.js:83`) for `POST /api/v1/places`; that check is still on master, and master additionally enforces parent type on the cht-datasource write routes added by #10083 (`POST /api/v1/place` → `getParentForCreate` → `assertHasValidParentType` (`local/libs/lineage.ts:296`, called at `local/place.ts:91`); `POST /api/v1/person` → `assertParent` in `local/person.ts`).
```
